# Likes and Dislikes of _Patients at Risk_

Recently, I read [_Patients at Risk_](https://www.amazon.com/Patients-Risk-Practitioner-Physician-Healthcare/dp/1627343164/) a book arguing that non-physicians (Nurse Practitioner, Physician's Assistants, etc.) have too much responsibility in the healthcare industry.

I don't have the expertise to evaluate the book in detail so I'll just list some likes and dislikes.

#### What I liked about the book

- The book explained the differences between physician and non-physician training in some detail. Specifically, it shared how physicians are trained in "differential diagnosis" in comparison to non-physicians (who are not).
- The book noted that there are no studies that showed the effectiveness of non-physicians practicing without physician supervision. This portion of the book surprised me for two reasons: First, I didn't know how many non-physicians practice virtually completely independent of physicians. For example, there are emergency departments that may have several "providers" on duty at a given time, none of whom are physicians. Second, it does seem disingenuous when non-physician advocacy groups share studies that only feature supervised non-physicians and use them to promote non-physicians working independently.
- I learned that federal funding for medical residency slots have been frozen since about 1997 and is one of the main constraints on having more physicians. This undermines the argument that physicians are conspiring to restrict their own supply to make more money.
- The book also noted that several studies have shown that non-physicians actually increase the cost of health care because they order more tests and make more specialist referrals. This was really interesting to learn. Given that lowering costs is one of the main arguments for increasing non-physician autonomy, I felt that the authors buried this lede relative to the amount of times they repeated other, less persuasive arguments.

#### What I disliked about the book

- The tone of the book was often aggressive, even emotional. I felt this undermined the credibility of the authors.
- The book repeated the difference in the amount of training hours between physicians and non-physicians numerous times. I felt this was an example of not engaging with an opponent's argument. No one is disputing the differences in training between physicians and non-physicians. Instead, non-physician advocates are wondering if this difference in training matters in a way that's meaningful to patients (which the authors do a decent job of addressing in some places). In fairness, there was some helpful information comparing how much more physicians train for specialities versus non-physicians.
- The book returned several times to the story of a basketball player who died after numerous mistakes by a Nurse Practitioner. The Nurse Practitioner in question was clearly unqualified for her role in the emergency department and was in the process of being removed from her job. I think it's reasonable to wonder whether this was a case of several individuals with bad judgment combining to create an awful outcome rather than an indictment of Nurse Practitioners everywhere. I think it's also reasonable to wonder what quality of doctor the hiring process that hired the problem Nurse Practitioner would have hired. The book strongly implies that a medical license endows a minimum level of effectiveness. I think this implication is unsupported -- even if a physician would have avoided the specific mistakes in the book, there's no guarantee that overconfidence or even personal problems (e.g. a substance abuse problem) of the physician could not have negatively impacted the patient in other ways. I think it would have been more persuasive to replace the attention devoted to this case to any cases where relatively typical Nurse Practitioners are providing care substandard to relatively typical doctors.
